---
title: All the waste we will unsee
---

I've recently rewatched a video about artist Cassio Vasconcellos and his artwork _Over_<sup>[1]</sup>. In it he gives viewers insider's access to his process of exploration and development of this aerial image of a massive landfill. And he does so with purpose and without a trace of righteousness. It's art about our current reality and it's about The Future.

After rewatching the video, I started asking myself what about it has captivated me and what I tend to like in art, generally. I came upon a few thoughts I want to jot down here.

From a young age, I was discouraged from seeing and asking questions about what I saw. It is dispiriting to reflect on how quickly and effectively I learned to unsee. And, once well-trained in this sorry skill, carry on into adulthood in the manner that keeps the assembly lines of family, school, workplace, society and government running without a hiccup. Which implies I also learned to move on from one thing to the next without stopping. To make matters more disconcerting, my life has never ceased to be entangled with events, sightings and experiences that are real and cannot be explained, and which I have promptly buried in that shadowy place that holds, among other treassures, inconvenient truths I've learned to unsee. We pay a high price to witness this mad world go on without hiccups or further questions.

Art, I have found, can help us remember to remember. Today, art adapts to survive in a world saturated with never-ending novelty and incoming images, and any one artwork rarely captures our attention _long enough_. In order to yield its gifts, art requires that I stop. _Long enough_ to consider what's in front of me and get to know it intimately, remembering, entering the particular world of the artwork, rather than insisting the art fit into mine<sup>[2]</sup>. At first, stopping may seem like an act of resistance against the modern world, but it is not. Our survival depends on it. We have more than 50,000 nuclear bombs and yet we can't stop making them<sup>[3]</sup>. Less existentially threatening but even more stupendously stupid, the United States no longer has a use for pennies, yes the 1 cent coins, and yet the U.S. Mint can't stop making those, either, even at a terrible financial loss.<sup>[4]</sup>

_Stopping_, then, is not only to stop the negative, but to allow the familiar to be considered anew, and to imagine what else might grow from it. That is the beauty of Over. A landfill is a landfill, but/and what else is there when considered from the view of flying bird and overstory? What more does it reveal when many of these landfills are then brought together into one single aerial image? And what could happen if things go on as they have? Stopping is, suddenly, not optional.

I like to think this work has captivated me because this image has been magicked. Its stillnes shows a trajectory towards a future no one wants, yet we all collectively will make it happen. It shows a landfill that doesn't exist, not yet, giving new meaning and significance to the real landfills that do. It shows a landfill that's the size of a city, where discarded airplanes and figther jets look like their tiny replicas against a barren, horrid landscape, where they are to spend the rest of their sad rusty afterlives. And the process of how it was magicked, which starts with Cassio's artistic sensibility and courage to see, is a wonderful example of how to methodically craft an illusion so that we may stop and reckon with reality and its inconvenient truths.

Art doesn't have to be anything. Or do anything other than exist. I tend to like art that makes me stop and look, and invites my imagination to play. Art that is witty and draws a smile in the mind, however grim its subject and grave its consequences. Over makes me ponder on the question "is this real?" but even more importantly, "what makes this possible?".

### Footnotes

<sup>[1]</sup>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7BHX8V49Ixg&ab_channel=CassioVasconcellos
<sup>[2]</sup> [Paraphrasing](<https://www.robinsloan.com/newsletters/like-likes-like/#:~:text=What%20happened%20(and%20this%20always%20presages%20a%20good%20expe%C2%ADri%C2%ADence%20with%20art)%20was%20that%20I%C2%A0surrendered%20to%20the%20strangeness%2C%20and%20the%20strange%C2%ADness%20started%20to%20make%20sense.%20I%C2%A0entered%20OOF%E2%80%99s%20world%2C%20rather%20than%20insisting%20the%20band%20fit%20into%20mine%2C%20which%20is%2C%20of%20course%2C%20the%20demand%20of%20the%20Spotify%C2%A0playlist>) the ever-insightful Robin Sloan
<sup>[3]</sup>Paraphrasing Tich Nhat Hanh in [Peace is Every Step](https://bookshop.org/p/books/peace-is-every-step-the-path-of-mindfulness-in-everyday-life-thich-nhat-hanh/8356129)
<sup>[4]</sup>This a [real and absurd problem](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/09/01/magazine/worthless-pennies-united-states-economy.html).
